GIT COMMANDS - CONCISE NOTES

1. git init

Meaning: Creates a new Git repository in the current folder.
When to use: Once, when starting Git tracking on a normal (non-Git) project.
Example:
cd my_project
git init


2. git clone

Meaning: Downloads an existing remote repository to your computer.
When to use: The first time you get a project that already exists on GitHub.
Example:
git clone https://github.com/user/project.git


3. git status

Meaning: Shows the current state of your working directory and staging area.
When to use: Very frequently - to check what has changed / staged.
Example:
git status
Output: modified: views.py


4. git add

Meaning: Moves changed/new files into the staging area.
When to use: Before committing, to select what goes into the next commit.
Example:
git add .
git add views.py


5. git commit

Meaning: Saves the staged changes into the local repository.
When to use: After staging, to record a version of your work locally (does not send to GitHub).
Example:
git commit -m "Added login API"


6. git push

Meaning: Sends local committed changes to the remote GitHub repository.
When to use: After committing, to publish your changes to GitHub.
Example:
git push


7. git pull

Meaning: Downloads remote changes and merges them into your current branch.
When to use: When GitHub has newer changes than your local copy (e.g., teammate pushed).
Example:
git pull


8. git fetch

Meaning: Downloads remote commit info WITHOUT merging into your current branch.
When to use: When you want to inspect remote updates before integrating them.
Example:
git fetch


9. git log

Meaning: Shows commit history.
When to use: To review past commits.
Example:
git log --oneline
Output:
abc123 Added login API
def456 Created user model


10. git branch

Meaning: Lists branches in the repository.
When to use: To see available branches and which one is active.
Example:
git branch
Output: * main, development


11. git switch

Meaning: Moves between branches (or creates a new one).
When to use: To change your working branch.
Example:
git switch development
git switch -c feature-login   (create + switch)


12. git merge

Meaning: Combines changes from one branch into the current branch.
When to use: To integrate a feature branch into main (or another branch).
Example:
git switch main
git merge feature-login


13. git remote

Meaning: Shows connections between your local repo and remote repositories.
When to use: To check your GitHub connection (URL, name).
Example:
git remote -v
Output: origin  https://github.com/user/project.git (fetch/push)


14. git remote add origin

Meaning: Connects a local repository to a remote GitHub repository.
When to use: Once, for a new local repo that isn't linked to GitHub yet.
Example:
git remote add origin https://github.com/user/project.git


15. git restore

Meaning: Discards unstaged changes and restores a file to its last committed version.
When to use: To undo unwanted local file edits (be careful - changes are lost).
Example:
git restore views.py


16. git stash

Meaning: Temporarily saves unfinished changes without committing them.
When to use: When you need to switch branches/tasks but aren't ready to commit.
Example:
git stash
git stash pop   (bring changes back later)


17. git revert

Meaning: Creates a new commit that undoes the effect of a previous commit.
When to use: To safely undo a commit that has already been pushed/shared.
Example:
git revert <commit-id>


18. git reset

Meaning: Moves the branch/HEAD backward; can change staged/committed state depending on option used.
When to use: Advanced local history management - use carefully as it can rewrite history.
Example:
git reset --soft HEAD~1


CORE DAILY WORKFLOW

git status -> git diff -> git add . -> git commit -m "message" -> git push


MASTER THESE FIRST

git clone, git status, git add, git commit, git push, git pull, git diff, git branch, git switch, git merge
